JSON : Stands for JavaScript Object Notation. is a lightweight format for storing and transporting data. It is easy for humans to read and write. (4)
YAML : Is a data serialization language that is often used for writing configuration files. It is human-readable and easy to understand. (5)
HTTP : Stands for Hyper Text Transfer Protocol. is the foundation of the World Wide Web, and is used to load web pages using hypertext links. (6)
RESTful API :Is an interface that two computer systems use to exchange information securely over the internet. (7)
Web Server : A web server stores and delivers the content for a website content to clients that request it. is substantially used to host the web sites. (8)
Reverse Proxy : Is a server that sits in front of web servers and forwards client requests to those web servers. It is typically  used to help increase security, performance, and reliability. (9)
SSH : Stands for Secure Shell. is a network protocol that helps us securely access and communicate with remote machines (mostly remote servers). (11)
AWS : Stands for Amazon Web Services. It is a platform that offers flexible, reliable, scalable, easy-to-use and cost-effective cloud computing solutions. (12)
Python : Python is an interpreted, object-oriented, high-level programming language with dynamic semantics. It is preferred for programming due to its vast features, applicability, and simplicity. The Python programming language best fits machine learning due to its independent platform and its popularity in the programming community. (15)
Numpy : Stands for Numerical Python. Numpy is a Python library consisting of multidimensional array objects and a collection of routines for processing those arrays. Using NumPy, mathematical and logical operations on arrays can be performed. (16)
Pandas : It is a Python library that is most widely used for machine learning and data science tasks. It is provided on the top of  Numpy, which provides support for multi-dimensional arrays. (17)
Matplotlib : It is a data visualization and graphical plotting library for Python. It makes easy things easy and hard things possible. (18)
Pillow : It is a fork of PIL, Stands for Python Imaging Library. It is the standard image processing package for the Python programming language. It includes lightweight image processing capabilities that help with image creation, editing, and saving. (19)  
Tensorflow: It is an open-source platform developed by Google Brain Team. It is entirely based on the Python programming language and used for numerical computation and data flow, which makes creating and deploying machines and deep learning models faster and easier. (20)
Keras: It is a deep learning API written in Python, running on top of the machine learning platform TensorFlow, Keras simplifies the implementation of complex neural networks with its easy to use framework. (21)
CUDA: It is a parallel computing platform and an API model that was developed by NVIDIA. CUDA enables developers to speed up compute-intensive applications by harnessing the power of GPUs for the parallelizable part of the computation. (22)  
cuDNN: Stands for CUDA Deep Neural Network. It is a low-level library that provides GPU kernels frequently used in deep learning. cuDNN  provides highly tuned implementations for standard routines such as forward and backward convolution, pooling, normalization, and activation layers. (23)
Anaconda: It is a distribution of the Python and R programming languages that is open-source and free. The Python interpreter and a number of machine learning and data science-related packages are included in the distribution. For those interested in those fields, Anaconda makes it simple to install all (or the majority) of the required packages with a single installation. (24)
Jupyter Notebook  : It is a free, open-source, interactive web tool known as a computational notebook, which researchers can use to combine software code, computational output, explanatory text and multimedia resources in a single document. (25)
JavaScript: It is a dynamic computer programming language used both on the client-side and server-side that allows you to create more dynamic interactions when developing web pages, applications, servers, and or even games. (26)  
React.js: It is a JavaScript library that is open-source and used to create user interfaces specifically for single-page applications. It is utilized to manage the view layer for web and mobile applications. We can design reusable UI components with React as well. (27)
Material-UI: It is a library that allows us to import and use different components to create a user interface in our React applications. (277)
Mongoose: It is an Object Data Modeling (ODM) library for MongoDB and Node.js. It manages relationships between data, provides schema validation, and is used to translate between objects in code and the representation of those objects in MongoDB.
Dart: Dart is an open-source, general-purpose, object-oriented programming language developed by Google. It is used with Flutter to build mobile, web and  apps. This is one of the most common uses of Dart today. (28)        
Flutter: Flutter is a free and open-source mobile UI framework created by Google. it allows you to create a native mobile, desktop, and web apps with a single codebase. This means that you can use one programming language and one codebase to create different apps. (29)
Node.js: It is an open-source, cross-platform runtime environment built on Chrome's V8 JavaScript engine that allows developers to create all kinds of server-side tools and applications in JavaScript. (30)
MongoDB: It is a non-relational document database that supports storage which is similar to JSON. The MongoDB database offers full indexing support, replication, and a flexible data model that makes it possible to store unstructured data. It also has rich and user-friendly APIs. (31)
Express.js: It  is a free and open-source web application framework for Node.js. It is used for designing and building web applications quickly and easily. (32)
Flask: It is a microframework that provides libraries to build lightweight web applications in python. (33)
Slack: "It is essentially a chat room designed to replace email as your primary method of communication and sharing. Its workspaces allow you to organize communications by channels for group discussions and allows for private messages to share information, files, and more all in one place." (34)
Github: "It is an online software development platform used for storing, tracking, and collaborating on software projects. It enables developers to upload their own code files and to collaborate with fellow developers on open-source projects." (35)
Nginx: "It is open source software for web serving, reverse proxying, caching, load balancing, media streaming, and more. It started out as a web server designed for maximum performance and stability." (36)
Docker: "is an open platform for developing, shipping, and running applications. Docker enables you to separate your applications from your infrastructure so you can deliver software quickly. With Docker, you can manage your infrastructure in the same ways you manage your applications. By taking advantage of Docker’s methodologies for shipping, testing, and deploying code quickly, you can significantly reduce the delay between writing code and running it in production." (37)
EC2: "Stands for Elastic Compute Cloud. It provides scalable computing capacity in the Amazon Web Services (AWS) Cloud. Using Amazon EC2 eliminates your need to invest in hardware up front, so you can develop and deploy applications faster." (38)