1. Introduction
Skin has several functions. It provides a barrier to water loss and
pathogens and protects against diverse forms of trauma, including
thermal, chemical and ultraviolet radiation. Skin keeps us in touch with
our environment through a host of nerve endings, regulates body
temperature and enhances metabolic functions, as well as synthesizing
vitamin D [1]. To fulfill this purpose, regenerated skin requires three
integrated structural characteristics: 1. a layered interface, 2. epidermal
appendages, and 3. mechanical stability.



5. Functions

5.1. Barrier function
The importance of the skin as a barrier is illustrated by the mortality
associated with large surface area burns, where increased transepi-
dermal water loss culminates in dehydration, renal failure and shock.
Whereas other land-living animals such as insects have adapted by
possessing a rigid cuticle coated with hydrocarbons, mammals have
evolved a unique tough, flexible stratum corneum [21].

5.2. Immunological barriers
5.2.1. Innate immunity
Skin is an active immunological organ, and dysfunctional innate
defenses have serious clinical implications. Products of the stratum
corneum, including free fatty acids, polar lipids, and glycosphingolipids
accumulate in the intercellular spaces and horny layer, exhibiting an-
timicrobial properties, and functioning as a first line of defense.
Antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) exhibit potent and targeted resistance
against a wide spectrum of common pathogens [28]. When this barrier
is breached, second lines of protection are provided by inflammatory
cascades in the subepithelial tissue.

5.2.2. Adaptive immunity
Most types of bacteria have been shown to increase the number of T
cells in the skin [66]. Interactions between T cells and microbial anti-
gens trigger the promotion of various immune cells to attack specific
microbes in the dermal compartments (Fig. 6). Skin provides targeted
protection against invasive pathogens and regulates barrier immunity
via symbiotic chemo-signaling, highlighting that innate and adaptive
immune responses work together as a robust first line of defense. These
findings demonstrate that the skin’s immune defense system is highly
dynamic and can be rapidly and specifically remodeled by a full spec-
trum of micro-organisms.

5.3. Ultra-violet light protection
Biosynthesis of melanin involves a complex pathway that occurs in
melanocytes, within membrane-bound organelles called melanosomes.
Melanocytes are present in the basal and suprabasal layers of the skin
and in the hair follicles and transfer melanosomes through dendritic
processes where they form melanin caps that reduce the harmful effects
of ultra-violet light. Each melanocyte communicates with 30–40 kera-
tinocytes [67].


5.4. Sensory function
The skin receives, processes and transmits environmental informa-
tion from multiple sensory receptors. Its information processing system
and ability to release neurotransmitters and hormones that influence
whole-body states and emotions, has prompted Denda to liken the
organ to an auxiliary brain [69]. His analogy suggests encoding of the
various sensory modalities requires keratinocyte-neuronal signaling.
The resulting stimulus is translated into an action potential, which is
transmitted via afferent nerve fibers to the central nervous system.
Scattered throughout the skin are specific epidermal cell receptors.
Amongst the basal keratinocytes in the epidermis are Merkle cells [70].
These slowly adapting mechanoreceptor cells detect light touch, as well
as spatial features such as curvature and edge. Myelinated axons (dia-
meter about 5 μm) lose their myelin sheath, penetrate the basal lamina
and branch extensively to supply up to 50 Merkel cells. Hoffman et al.
have elegantly shown that Merkel cells communicate with sensory
neurons through α2-adrenergic receptors at excitatory synapses [71].
Two types of sensory receptors are found in the dermis; bare nerve
endings, for nociception, thermal sensation (heat and cold); and cap-
sulated mechanoreceptors such as Meissner’s corpuscles, that detect
moving touch, and Pacinian corpuscles, perceiving vibration and brief
touch [72].
The skin, however, has the capacity to detect a pattern of me-
chanical stimuli on a smaller scale than would be expected merely by
the location of the nerve terminals [73]. This is due to the keratinocytes
themselves containing sensors that can recognize and respond to a wide
range of physical and chemical environmental factors. Members of the
transient receptor potential family (TRP) are expressed with the ability
to sense a range of environmental stimuli. For example, TRPV1 is
strongly expressed near the surface of the skin which is consistent with
its role in detecting temperature changes [74]. TRPV3 and 4 are acti-
vated by mechanical stress and changes in osmotic pressure,

respectively [75,76]. In addition, a variety of environmental factors,
including visible light and sound can influence epidermal permeability
barrier homeostasis. Indeed, keratinocytes express photo-receptor like
proteins present in the retina [77].
Other modes of communication exist between the epidermis and the
central nervous system. Keratinocytes release neurotransmitters, neu-
ropeptides, hormones and cytokines which transmit and process sen-
sory information in the CNS and can affect the physiology of multiple
systems [78]


5.5. Vitamin D synthesis
The skin is a ready source of vitamin D following sun exposure. It is
a fat-soluble prohormone steroid primarily acknowledged for its
endocrine role in calcium homeostasis maintaining levels of serum
calcium through control of calcium and phosphate absorption from the
intestine, and resorption of bone [79]. However, it also has other bio-
logical effects playing a lesser role in the regulation of skin differ-
entiation, immune function, hair follicle cycling, photo-protection,
upregulation of innate immune defenses and wound healing [80–82].
Vitamin D exists in the plasma membranes of basal and suprabasal
keratinocytes and dermal fibroblasts in its inactive form 7-dehy-
drocholesterol, and is first converted to previtamin D3 prior to hydro-
xylation in the liver and in the kidneys to its active form 1,25-dihy-
droxyvitamin D. Overproduction of vitamin D is prevented by a
feedback loop whereby previtamin D3 is converted to the inactive
photoproducts lumistrol and tachysterol (Fig. 7).

5.6. Temperature control
The skin controls body temperature. The underlying adipose tissue
insulates against conductive heat loss, whereas loss of heat is facilitated
actively by evaporation of sweat from the skin surface and by increased
blood flow through the rich vascular network within the dermis.
From the thermoregulation perspective, our skin is heterogeneous.
There is non-hairy glabrous skin that covers the most distal body parts
and hairy non-glaborous skin, covering the rest of the body.
The main thermosensory-related role of non-hairy glabrous skin is
to assess local temperatures and tactile signals. It is characterized by the
absence of hair, dense vascularization, the presence of arteriovenous
anastomoses and a large surface-to-volume ratio. It can mount two
opposite responses. The body’s thermoregulatory response to over-
heating is achieved by vasodilatation with increasing blood flow and
rapid release of heat into the environment. Remarkably, in the human
finger, the flow can increase by 500 % [83]. Secondly, cutaneous va-
soconstriction and closing of the anastomoses cause an abrupt cessation
of heat loss.
The body is covered, however, mostly by hairy (non-glabrous) skin,
which is typically insulated from the environment (with clothes in
humans and with fur in non-human mammals). Thermal signals from
hairy skin represent a temperature of the insulated superficial layer of
the body and provide feedback to the thermoregulation system [84].
The hairy skin is characterized by the lack of arteriovenous anasto-
moses and by the presence of hair follicles. Both features make the skin
better suited to serve as a thermal insulator.


6. Discussion
Skin is an intricate, self-renewing organ that is our primary defense
barrier against a hostile environment. It protects against harmful anti-
gens and chemicals, dehydration and overhydration, and ultraviolet
radiation. It provides structural integrity and resilience, allows selective
absorption, antioxidant storage, controls thermoregulation through
fluctuations in cutaneous blood supply and perspiration and can sti-
mulate epidermal regeneration when injured.
The clinical significance of skin is illustrated by the morbidity as-
sociated with burns and cutaneous defects. Current models of biological
research have not yet surpassed the skin graft as a standard of care for
the resurfacing of full-thickness wounds. We highlight the importance
of attaining induced organ regeneration to replicate all essential pro-
cesses of skin.
