Abstract
The skin is the largest organ in the body and forms the interface be-
tween the body and the environment. Its structure is highly adapted
to protect the body from many forms of noxious agents, to maintain
homeostasis in several physiologic domains and to allow the individual
to appreciate various modalities of sensation. The skin is divided into
three layers e the epidermis, dermis and hypodermis or (subcutane-
ous fat). The epidermis is a continually regenerating structure formed
mainly from keratinocytes which account for the majority of cells in
the epidermis. The pigment melanin, produced in the melanocyte
cells of the epidermis is a major factor in determining skin colour.
The dermis supports and gives strength and flexibility to the epidermis.
It contains multiple blood vessels, lymphatics and nerves within its
connective tissue architecture. The hypodermis is composed of
various amounts of subcutaneous fat which plays a role in thermoreg-
ulation and water storage. It is essential that surgeons have a good
knowledge of the structure of skin in order to choose the optimum
site for surgical incisions, to understand the best methods of wound
closure and to anticipate potential problems with wound healing.
Keywords Dermis; epidermis; hypodermis; wound closure



Introduction
The skin is a large and complex organ accounting for a total area
of approximately 20 square feet. It compromises 15% of the total
adult body weight. 1 It is highly adaptive with various thickness
and specialized functions throughout the human body.
Anatomically, it is divided into three layers: epidermis, dermis
and hypodermis. This article will describe the anatomy of the
skin taking into consideration its anatomical function, structure,
blood supply and clinical significance. It is vital that surgeons
have an in-depth knowledge of skin and surgical considerations
such as wound closure techniques, sutures and technical factors
to optimize wound healing.
The aim of this chapter is to provide an overview of the
anatomy of the skin and its implications for surgery. Anatomical
features are specialized in relation to multiple functions of the
skin and have implications for surgical considerations, such as
scar placement and wound care. The physiology and pathology
of wound healing will be covered in detail in other chapters of
this issue.




Functions of skin
The skin has six main functions which are discussed in greater
detail on pages 8e12 of this issue. The anatomical features which
enable and enhance these six functions listed below are indicated
in this article.
 Protection: The skin interfaces directly with the environ-
ment, acting as a barrier separating the internal organs and
external environment. It prevents harmful chemicals and
pathogens from entering the body, in addition to cush-
ioning the impact of mechanical, thermal or physical in-
juries. It also protects against the effects of ultraviolet
radiation (UVR) and is water resistant. The skin is also a
large immunological organ which plays a role in protecting
the body against infection.
 Thermostat: Skin can adapt to changes in body tempera-
ture. It uses mechanisms such as insensible perspiration,
eccrine sweating, and dilatory or constrictive changes in
the cutaneous vasculature to preserve or disseminate body
heat.
 Neural relay network: An extensive network of nerve
cells detects and relays changes in the environment. Re-
ceptors detect stimuli of various sensations such as touch,
pain and temperature. Touch includes light touch, two-
point discrimination and vibration modalities. There is
also a motor component to the innervation of the skin,
which includes the involuntary smooth muscle associated
with hair follicles and the specific striated muscles which
are directly attached to skin, such as the muscles of facial
expression and dartos.
 Expression and communication: A more social function
is the ability for skin to enable individuals to display
emotions. It acts as an indicator of one’s physical state.
Skin is an important component of the stress response as it
acts as an immediate stress perceiver and as a target of
stress responses.
 Water store: Skin acts a storage centre for water. This is
mainly in the dermis layer of skin and accounts for 18
e20% of total body water volume.
 Synthesis of vitamin D: The skin is the main site of
vitamin D production but is dependent on exposure to
ultraviolet light.



Anatomy of the skin
From the outside inwards, the skin consists of three layers
 epidermis
 dermis
 hypodermis, also known as the subcutaneous tissue.
Each layer has a functional role and is an integral part the
skin.

Epidermis
The epidermis is a physical and biological barrier, preventing
pathogens and irritants from penetrating the body. The main cell
type in the epidermis is the keratinocyte. At least 80% of cells in
the epidermis are ectodermally derived keratinocytes

--------------------------------extract figure 1-------------------------------------

Dermis
The dermis gives skin its durability, strength and flexibility. It is
mainly composed of connective tissue and contains numerous
blood vessel, lymphatics and nerves.

Hypodermis
The hypodermis (also known as subcutaneous fat) acts as the
main structural support of the skin. It plays a vital role in ther-
moregulation and shock absorption. The amount of fat in this
layer varies widely between individuals. It is a highly vascular
layer and interlaced with blood vessels.

Hair
Hair is a skin appendage present on most parts of the body. Areas of
the body typically devoid of hair include the palmar and plantar
surfaces, lips, and urogenital orifices. 5 Hair functions to protect the
skin against minor trauma, assists thermoregulation, is sensitive to
tactile stimuli and has specific functions such as filtering of
inspired air (nasal hairs) or eye protection (eyelashes).

Sweat glands
Sweat glands are found across the entire surface of the body and
play a role in lubricating the skin, temperature regulation, salt
and water balance and are essential for the maintenance of
normal physiology.
There are three ty


--------------------some stuff to include in definitions----------------------------------------
Nerve supply of the skin
Numerous nerve cells and fibres are present throughout the skin,
which is the body’s largest sensory organ. The skin provides the
individual with the sensations which relate to one’s environ-
ment, in respect of potential threats of harm from trauma, heat or
cold, pressure, foreign bodies or infection. Nerve bundles lie in
the subcutaneous tissue and, from these, multiple fibres pass into
the skin layers. These fibres may be myelinated or not and form a
loose plexus in the mid dermis. They transmit various modalities
of sensation along with a smaller motor component, such as
innervation of the muscles of facial expression and erector pilae.
Myelinated fibres are mostly destined to supply encapsulated
receptors while, more superficially, there are small groups of
unmyelinated fibres which may be surrounded by a single peri-
neural cell.
Free nerve endings are thought to mediate sensations in
hairless skin such as the palms, soles, lips and genital areas.
However, there is debate as to whether any nerve endings are
completely ‘free’, as electron microscopy studies suggest that
axons within the dermis have at least some cover from sur-
rounding Schwann Cells. Within the epidermis, unmyelinated
fibres appear to terminate in association with Merkel cells as
described above.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


Conclusion
The skin is a vital organ for survival. Its multiple functions
protect from environmental pathogens and harmful UV radiation.
It plays a major role in thermoregulation ensuring the body can
adapt to changes in temperature.
Successful wound closure requires an in depth understanding
of wound anatomy, physiology, and phases of healing. Surgeons
must apply this knowledge in clinical practice to optimize wound
healing and cosmetic outcomes, while minimizing any
complications.




Practice points


The skin is the largest organ of the body. It performs many vital
functions, including protection against external physical, chemi-
cal, and biologic toxins, as well as prevention of excess water loss
from the body and a role in thermoregulation

Skin is anatomically divided into three layers: epidermis, dermis
and hypodermis. The dynamic epidermis produces a protective
outer layer by a process of keratinization and terminal differen-
tiation. Collagen and elastin filaments of the dermal layer provide
the underlying tensile strength of the skin, whereas the layer of
subcutaneous fat provides a store of energy for the body and
contributes to heat retention

Serious consideration should be given to the exact site of surgical
incisions, as factors such as wound location, patient comorbid-
ities, tissue mobility and blood supply all have a great impact on
wound healing and cosmetic results

Choice of sutures and suturing technique should be appropriate
for the individual wound and its expected course of healing. Each
suture type has specific advantages and disadvantages which
should be considered

Many non-suture alternatives are available for clinical use. Sur-
geons should familiarize themselves with alternative products
and techniques in order to optimize wound closure and healing




===================my paraphrase==========================
body largest sensory organ
interface between body and environment
highly adaptive structure to protect body against multiple harmful agents
provides various modalities of sensation
3 layers
    Each layer has a functional role and is an integral part the skin.
    epidermis
        constantly regenerating
        contains the pigment melanin determins skin color
        physical and biological barrier
    dermis
        supports and gives strength and flexibility to epidermis
        mainly composed of connective tissue
    hypodermis (subcutaneous fat)
        composed of subcutaneous fat -> thermoregulation and water storage
        main structural support of the skin
        shock absorption
    
    hair
        Hair functions to protect the skin against minor trauma, 
        assists thermoregulation, 
        is sensitive to tactile stimuli and has specific functions such as filtering of inspired air (nasal hairs) or eye protection (eyelashes). 

    sweat glands
        found across intire body
        lubrication
        temperature regulation
        salt and water balance


total area of 20 square feet
15% of total body weight
This article will describe the anatomy of the skin taking into consideration its anatomical function, structure,


6 main functions
protection
thermostat
neural relay network
expression and communication
    A more social function
    is the ability for skin to enable individuals to display
    emotions. It acts as an indicator of one’s physical state.
    Skin is an important component of the stress response as it
    acts as an immediate stress perceiver and as a target of
    stress responses.
water storage
    18-20% of totla body water
Synthesis of vitamin D

