Abstract
The skin is a complex and multifunctional organ, in which the static versus dynamic balance is responsible for its
constant adaptation to variations in the external environment that is continuously exposed. One of the most
important functions of the skin is its ability to act as a protective barrier, against the entry of foreign substances
and against the excessive loss of endogenous material. Human skin imposes physical, chemical and biological
limitations on all types of permeating agents that can cross the epithelial barrier. For a molecule to be passively
permeated through the skin, it must have properties, such as dimensions, molecular weight, pKa and hydrophilic-
lipophilic gradient, appropriate to the anatomy and physiology of the skin. These requirements have limited the
number of commercially available products for dermal and transdermal administration of drugs. To understand
the mechanisms involved in the drug permeation process through the skin, the approach should be multidisci-
plinary in order to overcome biological and pharmacotechnical barriers. The study of the mechanisms involved in
the permeation process, and the ways to control it, can make this route of drug administration cease to be a
constant promise and become a reality. In this work, we address the physicochemical and biopharmaceutical
aspects encountered in the pathway of drugs through the skin, and the potential added value of using solid lipid
nanoparticles (SLN) and nanostructured lipid vectors (NLC) to drug permeation/penetration through this route.
The technology and architecture for obtaining lipid nanoparticles are described in detail, namely the composition,
production methods and the ability to release pharmacologically active substances, as well as the application of
these systems in the vectorization of various pharmacologically active substances for dermal and transdermal
applications. The characteristics of these systems in terms of dermal application are addressed, such as
biocompatibility, occlusion, hydration, emollience and the penetration of pharmacologically active substances.
The advantages of using these systems over conventional formulations are described and explored from a phar-
maceutical point of view.



------------contains some structural info also-----------------------